Subject:    Re: EAV Updates for DISKMAP
From:       KEITH COWDEN <cowdenkb@sbcglobal.net>
Date:       Thu, 2 Oct 2008 13:53:02 -0700 (PDT)
To:         Sam Golob <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

Hi, Sam !!!

I did as you suggested (went to cbttape.org, Updates, file792,
uploaded to MVS system, and took a look).  Everything in there
looks reasonable to ME.  I really like your approach of
for-those-not-having-z/OS-1.10 to "just run the load module"
(and, for the "curious", or those that want to fiddle-with the
source, there's that, too !!).

As we now KNOW (thru "stepwise iteration"), there's quite a few
macros or mappings from z/OS V1R10 (1.10) (FMID HDZ1A10) that are
needed to get a 'clean' assembly of the source.  As you know, but
it's not really "documented" in there (that I noticed, anyway)
the "DISKMAPO" member was/is the "original" source that I pulled
from CBT in May-ish of 2005 from whence I used that as a "base"
for the various modifications I made to it, with the 'resulting'
(updated) source in member DISKMAP (without the "O").

Macros needed for assembly at z/OS 1.10 level:

CVAFDSM DCBE IECSDSL1 OBTAIN TRKADDR

One of the things that I wound-up "having" to do to DISKMAP, that
I forgot to mention until now, is that I made it have
31-bit-'smarts' in that the program "starts out" in AMODE(24) and
then, for the areas of storage it GETMAINS, and when the program
is not doing I/O-that-requires-24-bit-mode, I run in 31-bit mode
(so the GETMAINS "go to" the extended-private area (as opposed-to
private-area "below the line").  The REASON I HAD TO DO SO IS: on
an EAV, there can be MANY THOUSANDS of datasets, and there simply
isn't enough private-area "below the line" for DISKMAP to "keep
track of" all those extents for all those datasets.  In FACT, on
some EAVs I've tested on/with, I had to specify a larger REGION
parameter on the STEP card to get enough private-area ABOVE the
line for the program to successfully complete !!!

I'm so glad that I was able to "share" EAV DISKMAP support with
"the community out there" !!  How much of a DISKMAP "base" is out
there in the field, I have no idea, but, like I told you before,
I've been using DISKMAP since '77 or '78 myself ....

Keith

Note from Sam Golob:  I started using it right away.

