This note is from Sam Golob

   People who are not familiar with the Fujitsu MVS-lookalike
operating systems are probably in the U.S., where the Fujitsu
FACOM etc. operating systems are not to be sold, as per agreement
with IBM after a lawsuit.

   After IBM was forbidden to distribute MVS for free (in 1978 I
think), the Fujitsu people took free MVS 3.8 as a starting point,
and developed their own extensions to MVS, independently of IBM.
These systems were very common in Asia, Australia, and some other
countries.  Their control blocks are somewhat different from IBM's,
though similar.  In countries like Australia, these systems used to
be very common because they were very cheap, compared to MVS.  But
IBM outdistanced Fujitsu technically--Fujitsu never came out with
an equivalent architecture to ESA--and most shops that were running
Fujitsu operating systems eventually converted to MVS.

   However the data didn't disappear, and if a shop had a lot of
data which had been created on an old Fujitsu system and they
converted to MVS, the data had to become usable on MVS.  Since ISPF
was not present on Fujitsu, and the Fujitsu people "rolled their
own" version of it, Fujitsu statistics, which were not the same as
ISPF statistics, were not visible under ISPF, when ISPF and various
other tools would try and display the dataset members.  Hence Clem's
conversion program from Fujitsu statistics to ISPF statistics for
pds members.


