1. Introduction    (See member #USERGDE in PDF format for
                    complete documentation.)

NoSQLz is a key-value Database Management System running under
z/OS. It provides direct or sequential access to schema-less
tables.

A table dataset (or database) is a VSAM dataset that resides on
one (or several) disks.

Table data consists of 'format-agnostic' variable-length records.
Records are handled through create, read, update and delete
functions.

Record size goes from 500 bytes (minimum) to 75 MB (large records
supported). There may be up to approximately 1,000,000,000
records in a single table.

A record key is always a variable-length string, from 1 to 250
bytes. Records may have different key-lengths in the same
database. For this reason, key length must always be supplied to
access records. A record is uniquely referred to by the
combination (key length, key value).

ACID properties are provided so that you may write application
programs that implement database transactions. A transaction is a
set of information processing operations that leave the database
in a consistent state: the operations that a transaction consists
of are either all completed successfully or all cancelled
successfully. The COMMIT processing takes care of consistency to
maintain ACID properties throughout the life of the databases.

With NoSQLz, data retrieval is always favored, at the possible
expense of updates.

This free version of NoSQLz is destined to a monoplex. A
chargeable version provides multiple concurrent accesses natively
throughout the sysplex.

NoSQLz may be used for highly-available applications, data
warehousing, document store, Internet applications, OLAP, etc.

