*Welcome to GCCMVS (GCC for MVS, CMS and VSE) - a freely available
31-bit mainframe compiler*

GCCMVS is a standalone compiler designed to run on MVS (from z/OS all
the way back to MVS 3.8j, and probably beyond to PCP, but no-one has
tested (or at least reported) back that far) or CMS (z/VM and
predecessors) and VSE (z/VSE back to DOS/VS R34). It consists of two
distinct parts. Firstly, the standard GCC 3.2.3 compiler with some
required code changes for MVS and CMS. Secondly, PDPCLIB, which is a C
runtime library required for GCC to be able to run, and also for your
own programs to be able to run. Both things are required, and both
things are what is dubbed "GCCMVS". Note that the licence for the GCC
part is GPL while PDPCLIB is public domain (explicit PD notice). Because
PDPCLIB is pure public domain, it means that there are no licencing
restrictions on executables you produce yourself. ie commercial use is
fine, and you can even sell PDPCLIB (original or modified, including
proprietary modifications, with or without source) if you find a market.

The source code and executables for GCCMVS can be found at sourceforge
<http://sourceforge.net/projects/gccmvs>, in the "downloads" link. There
is also an old port of GCCMVS to MUSIC/SP which is available here
<http://webpages.mcgill.ca/staff/group3/dedwar1/web>. Unfortunately the
author of the MUSIC/SP version (Dave Edwards) passed away, but the
mainline source code does MUSIC/SP now too, but it lacks nice packaging.
The MVS version also works under PDOS/390.

Porting the compiler to the mainframe opened up the floodgates to lots
of C code being able to be ported. The downloads section contains some
such applications. The most impressive one is probably the "diff3"
utility. If you have never heard of a three-way diff, you will not
regret learning what it can do for you.

GCCMVS consumes a lot of memory when compiling large programs. More than
the 24-bit address space of MVS 3.8j can handle in fact. Fortunately,
even if you want to compile large programs, there now exists free 31-bit
mainframe operating systems - the OS/380 <http://mvs380.sourceforge.net>
suite. If you want, you can fire these up to do your compile and get a
24-bit module generated that is suitable for running on an existing
24-bit version of MVS. The GCCMVS and GCCCMS executables provided at the
sourceforge site are 31-bit executables targetting (by default) 24-bit
systems, although a 24-bit executable (suitable for small programs) is
also provided. You are free to configure it to be 31-bit targetting
31-bit if you wish (and even within that configuration there are more
options available e.g. whether to use a heap or not). The MVS
executables are provided in XMIT format for the convenience of z/OS
users. Note that z/OS is considered to be the primary target of GCCMVS,
although most testing actually occurs on the "compatible" MVS/380.

There are a few introductory tutorials for using GCCMVS on MVS 3.8,
although at time of writing they hadn't been updated to GCCMVS 7.0.

  * Installing GCCMVS <gccdocs/gccmvs.html>
  * Using GCCMVS <gccdocs/usegcc.html>
  * Practical GCCMVS <gccdocs/pracgcc.html>

Most discussion of GCCMVS takes place here
<http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/hercules-os380>, although there are
several other suitable places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
E-mail Paul Edwards here <mailto:fight.subjugation@gmail.com>.

