*Welcome to PDOS (Public Domain Operating System) and PDPCLIB
(Public Domain Project C Library)*

There are two major components to the PDOS project.

The most commonly used component, thanks to GCCMVS
<http://gccmvs.sourceforge.net> (port of GCC to IBM mainframe) is
PDPCLIB which is a public domain C runtime library which you can
link your own C programs against to produce executables with no
licencing restrictions (even if you use a compiler, commerical or
non-commercial, that does have licencing restrictions). PDPCLIB
works on DOS, OS/2, Win32, PDOS, MVS (mainframe) and CMS. The
library conforms to the ISO/IEC 9899:1990 (aka ANSI X3.159-1989
aka C90 aka C89) standard. It has no extensions so is
particularly good at finding out if your code is truly portable.

Secondly there is an operating system, with a user interface as
simple as MSDOS, but behind the scenes the story is quite
different. There are 2 completely different APIs supported (MSDOS
and MVS). The MSDOS API is supported on both the 16-bit 8086 and
32-bit 80386. On the 80386, it isn't really the MSDOS API, it is
a theoretical 32-bit MSDOS API (note that while the API and
applications are pure 32-bit, it internally switches to 16-bit in
order to be able to use the BIOS, a fact that the application and
end user is completely unaware of). The MVS API is supported on
the 24-bit S/370 and 31-bit S/390 IBM mainframe hardware.  The
31-bit S/380 from Fujitsu is also supported. The 16-bit MSDOS API
and the 24/31-bit MVS API are both able to run a subset of
real-world applications that were targetted to the original
environment that they are in some ways a clone of.

Note that a 3rd API - Posix - is expected to be implemented at
some point, starting with the S/3x0 hardware. After which, a port
of NetBSD may be possible. Note that only the S/3x0 target with
the MVS API is currently under active development.

You can find documentation for PDOS and PDPCLIB in text files in
the downloadables here <http://sourceforge.net/projects/pdos>.

There is also some miscellaneous programs with source code there,
including OZPD (snippets of PD code), PDPZM (public domain
zmodem), PDCOMM (PD communication routines for DOS, OS/2 and
Windows), BBS-related stuff (Devil Dialer C, RSEND, Tobruk),
RZSZPE - a port of rzsz (zmodem) to DOS and OS/2, and PDCRC - a
set of CRC routines.

Most discussion of PDPCLIB takes place here
<http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/hercules-os380>, amongst
mainframe enthusiasts. There is no real discussion group for PDOS
although it does get mentioned sometimes in the
alt.os.development newsgroup. Anyone interested in making
(explicitly public domain) enhancements to either component is
most welcome.
-----------------------------------------------------------------
E-mail Paul Edwards here <mailto:fight.subjugation@gmail.com>.

