 Performance hints and tips

The RESERVE option reserves a number of real storage page frames for a
particular virtual machine.  It acts as a private page pool to that virtual
machine.  This is usually a better alternative than LOCK because the most used
pages automatically tend to remain in real storage and you donUt have to be
concerned about addresses of heavily-used pages.  However, it does have its
price since the reserved pages are taken from the common page pool thereby
reducing it (this applies for LOCK too).  This may cause the other virtual
machines to start paging at an unacceptable rate.  It requires some testing to
determine the optimum number of pages to RESERVE.  If you have tools like VMMAP
or SMART you might get some help as both tools give you an average working set
that may be a good starting value.  The effect on paging is usually very
dramatic.  I have experienced one case where we had a system with a total page
rate of 25 pages per second, which was unacceptable in terms of CICS response
time.  We decided to RESERVE the average working set, which was about a third of
the page pool, to the virtual machine that ran our production CICS system.  As a
result the total page rate in the system went up to 60 pages per second, but
CICS response time (and the page rate of the particular machine) went down to
about a half of what it was before.  The impact on the other virtual machines
was also amazing, especially to the other virtual VSE machines whose CICS
response times went up to about 2 minutes (which was accepted at the time
because good response time in the production system was considered vital).  This
option only exists as a CP command and may be specified for multiple virtual
machines.
Steen Spuur Hansen (Denmark)  ) Xephon 1988








































