
                 Installation Procedures


This member is used with the xmit format PDS member that you downloaded
from the CBT tape.  The members within the pds have a basic set of
documentation.  The heart of the PDS is however the usermods themselves
and the sample SMP/e jobs used to install those usermods.  The usermods
are in members with a format of LSES5##, each has a corresponding member
with a suffix of "J" for example, LSES5##J, which is the sample SMP/e
job to install the associated usermods.

The data on the CBT tape contains all of our usermods - but - to only
install the mellon mods, you just need a few of the usermods.  I have
included a checklist of activities for the installation.



  ****  FastPath Checklist for Mellon Mods Install ****

  1-modify statements as required in member lses500, and the JCL
    in member lses500j and submit - to install jct/jqe extensions.

  2-modify statements as required in member lses503, and the JCL
    in member lses503j and submit - to install first jes2 exit04.

  3-modify statements as required in member lses504, and the JCL
    in member lses504j and submit - to install second jes2 exit04.

  4-modify statements as required in member lses507, and the JCL
    in member lses507j and submit - to install jes2 exit06.

  5-modify statements as required in member lses510, and the JCL
    in member lses510j and submit - to install jes2 exit20.

  6-modify statemenst as required in member lses512, and the JCL
    in member lses512j and submit - to install jes2 exit49.

  7-make loadmods available to the jes2 task - lla refresh, or steplib
    changes- whatever is required in your environment

  8-add LOADMOD and EXIT statements to the HASPPARM dataset.

  9-restart JES2.

 10-test - run some jobs containing Mellon control cards.
    see the DOCUSR member for more information on how to use the mods.
    I will try to get a standard IVP job set up for the next release.

 11-Share the documentation with the users - DOCOVW is an overview, and
    DOCUSR is a set of user documentation.

 12-Celebrate - wasn't that easy!?

 13-Send an e-mail to SGMcColley@ALLTEL.NET, let me know your e-mail
    address and that you are using the mods, I can then contact you when
    new versions are available and if any bugs are found, and or fixed.
    If you wish, I can also send you a PC friendly version of the
    documentation - suitable for sharing with others.

  *** end of fastpath install instructions ***



  Now for the details... I know you won't just run jobs blindly...



The Mellon Shared Spool Mods are provided in USERMOD format.  They will
add macro source members to SYSLIB(SHASMAC), and source members to
SYSLIB(SHASSRC), and will add JCLIN for the source members that causes
source members to be linked (IEWBLINK) into SHASLINK, as referenced by
the //SYSLMOD DD statement in each set of JCLIN.  You may need to alter
the syslmod statement to fit your installations needs before receiving
the usermods.  The JCLIN also references standard SYSLIB DD datasets;

    SYS1.MACLIB
    SYS1.MODGEN
    SYS1.SHASMAC
    SYS1.SHASSRC
    SYS1.AHASMAC
    SYS1.AHASSRC
    SYS1.AMACLIB
    SYS1.AMODGEN

  The names should be fine for most shops, if you have altered
the names to conform to local standards; the JCLIN may need
to have similar changes made, before receiving the usermods.

You should use normal RECEIVE, and APPLY jobsteps to install the mods.
Sample JOBS have been included in the PDS package in members that end
with a"J".   As delivered the jobs will REJECT a previous attempt to
apply, then RECEIVE a usermod, and finally APPLY the usermod.  I use
this sequence for reinstalls.  As delivered, you will get a bad return
code from the first run because the initial REJECT step will fail,
unless of course you have already applied the usermods.  The bad return
code from the REJECT can be ignored, or if you like simply resubmit the
entire job and all steps should run to a good completion code.  The jobs
may need to be modified to meet your shops specific needs.

  The member names are in the format - "LSES5##", these members are the
usermods and should be applied in the same sorted order that they appear
in the PDS directory.  Earlier usermods are required to successfully
apply later usermods.  They may all be applied at the same time, but I
prefer to install them one at a time, so that in the event there are any
problems, I can correct them one member at a time before continuing.  As
mentioned above the member names that are suffixed with a "J" are the
actual jobs, i.e. LSES500 is a single usermods, usermods LSES500, and
LSES500J is the member that contains sample JCL to install usermods
LSES500.

After SMP installation, update JES2 parms by adding the following
loadmod and exit statements.

 LOADMOD(STJTABS)     /* DYNAMIC TABLE DEFINITIONS FOR JQE EXTENSION */
LOADMOD(STSCX04A)    /* PARSES /*ROUTE XEQ RESNAME AND VALIDATES */
LOADMOD(STSCX04B)    /* PARSES /*BEFORE, AFTER,WITH, AND CNTL */
LOADMOD(STSCX06A)    /* TURNS /*ROUTE CNTL,XX INTO SCHENV= VALUES */
LOADMOD(STSCX20A)    /* COPIES JCT INFO INTO THE JQE EXTENSION    */
LOADMOD(STSCX49A)    /* IMPLEMENTS BEFORE, AFTER, WITH, CNTL STMTS */
EXIT(004) ROUTINE=(EXIT04A,EXIT04B),STATUS=ENABLED
EXIT(006) ROUTINE=(EXIT06A),STATUS=ENABLED
EXIT(020) ROUTINE=(EXIT20A),STATUS=ENABLED
EXIT(049) ROUTINE=(EXIT49A),STATUS=ENABLED


Make the updated JES2 load modules available, that may require a refresh
of LLA, or copying a maintenance pack to production.  Your own local
procedures will dictate what will need to be done.  The final step is to
shutdown and restart JES2, this can be accomplished via 'rolling warm
starts".  It is not necessary to shutdown all JES2 tasks in the MAS at
the same time, this is an important change from the original Mellon Mods
* * We no longer make any changes to the JES2 checkpoint records all
information that is saved for the Mellon Mods, and the info that is used
to alter the job selection sequences is maintained in formally supported
dynamic extensions to the jobs JCT and JQE.


 -  How the exits work, what each does -

The first LOADMOD statement is for module STJTABS, which is created with
usermods LSES500, it creates extensions to the JQE and JCT, which are
needed to contain the Mellon control statement information, are
referenced at job selection time.  There is no specific exit associated
with this module.

The second LOADMOD statement is for module STSCX04A, used in exit04.  It
parses the /*ROUTE XEQ RESNAME and performs basic validation.

The next LOADMOD statement is for module STSCX04B, also used in exit04.
It parses the /*BEFORE, AFTER, WITH and CNTL statements.

The next LOADMOD statement is for STSCX06A, used in exit06.  It turns
/*ROUTE CNTL, XX into SCHENV= values.

The next LOADMOD statement is for STSCX20A, is used in exit20, and
copies JCT info into the JQE extension before the JCT is lost.

The next LOADMOD statement is for STSCX49A, and implements the before
after, with, and cntl statements by rejecting or allowing JES2's
suggested 'next' job, in the job selection exit49.

  Of course, the entire source is provided for a closer look if you
desire to do so.


  -  Support for these mods  -

  As stated above, I will provide support on a time available basis, on
my own time.  Simply forward appropriate documentation of any problems
you encounter to me at SGMCCOLLEY@ALLTEL.NET and I will review them as
quickly as I can.  I usually review my e-mail at least once every 2
days.  I can however make no guarantee of support, or promise to fix
anything.  I will do what I can, and I want to make sure they work for
you.

  - let me know how your using the mods, and share an e-mail address -

If you would drop me a line at the e-mail address above after installing
these MODS and let me know you are using them, I will be able to let you
know when new versions are available, and if any bugs are found I can
alert you as soon as I know, and as soon as a fix is available.

  - Other suggested modifications  -

  If you have any suggestions for future enhancements, please let me
know by dropping me a line at SGMCCOLLEY@ALLTEL.NET and I will review
any and all suggestions, and implement those that I can in future
versions of the mods.  Again, this is not a guarantee of future changes,
just a guarantee that I will review and implement those that I can.






  I sincerly hope that these mods can help your shop, we use them here
at our shop, and have had very good sucess with them.

 - end of text -
