Controlling multiple MVS test systems

At any one time in our installation we will have at least two test
systems active.  In an effort to control these ever-changing systems and
reduce duplication of effort and resources the method described in this
article was evolved.


NOMENCLATURE

We have two 3090 Model 200 mainframes.  One runs our production work,
the other our development work.  The production system is known as Level
1 (LVL1), the development system as Level 2 (LVL2).  The SYSRES volumes
associated with these levels are RES100 and RES200, respectively.  The
numbers indicate the level and generation of the SYSRES.  For example,
RES100 is the LVL1 generation 0 SYSRES.  LVL3 and LVL4 are left for
expansion, leaving our test systems to start at LVL5.  Our oldest
testing system will be known as LVL5, and this will be the test system
used to apply maintenance for our live systems.  LVL6 onwards will be
complete upgrades in progress via CBIPO or CBPDO.

Common to all test systems is a volume CAT500, the contents of which are
described below.  Originally, the volume was the catalog volume for LVL5
only, hence the name, but it has now expanded to fill the function
detailed below.


TEST SYSTEM ENVIRONMENT

Each test system consists of a SYSRES and a DLIB volume, in our case
3380 disks.  The SYSRES name will reflect the development level, eg
CBIPO 86C yields a SYSRES RES86C.  The SYSRES consists of system target
libraries plus the SMPE target zone associated with the system.  The
DLIB volume contains the distribution libraries and the SMPE
distribution zone associated with this system.  Again the disk name
reflects the level, eg  DLB86C.

Wherever possible the High Level Qualifier (HLQ) of a library will also
reflect the level it belongs to, eg  DCF86C.  This provides a quick and
easy method of identification.  These names can be allocated for all
libraries using the CBIPO job SYMUPDT.  This convention cannot be used
for libraries that must have the HLQ SYS1, but these will all reside on
the SYSRES, and can be easily identified by their position.  Program
products can be included in the MVS zones, or can have separate zones.
Their target libraries will reside on the SYSRES and their DLIBs on the
DLIB volume.

To IPL any test system requires only two disks - a SYSRES and CAT500
(described below).  This two pack system can also be used in an
emergency if access to the live systems is impossible.  Of the two test
systems, one will be used to apply maintenance to the live systems, and
the other will be a complete upgrade in progress via CBIPO or CBPDO.


CAT500

In conjunction with these dynamic volumes there is CAT500.  This volume
contains the following:

SYS1.LOGREC
SYS1.DUMPxx
SYS1.HASPACE
SYS1.HASPCKPT
SYS1.HASPINDX            - SDSF     (see JES)
SYS2.HASPACE             - optional (see JES)
SYS2.HASPCKPT            - optional (see JES)
SYS2.HASPINDX            - optional (see JES)
SYS1.MLPALIB
SYS1.BRODCAST
SYS1.MANx
SYS1.PROCLIB
SYS1.PARMLIB
ICFM.CAT500                   - Master Catalog
PAG1.PLPA.CAT500         - PLPA page dataset
PAG2.COMMON.CAT500  - common page dataset
PAG3.LOCAL.CAT500        - local/swap page dataset
ZAA1.GLOBAL.CSI          - SMPE Global Zone
ZAA1.SMPPTS              - SMPE PTS
SYS1.JESLOAD             - JES load library

This list is not a definitive one and will vary according to each
installation's needs.

Thus this volume contains the 'non-dynamic' elements of an MVS system
(JES is discussed below).  This cuts down the development time of new
systems, and means that tasks that held us back before, such as defining
PARMLIB, building catalogs, and building BRODCAST on each new SYSRES
have been eliminated.  Therefore, as soon as the main SYSGEN has been
done on a new system we are in a position to IPL, with a better than
average chance of coming up.  Also each new system will, from its first
IPL, be customised for our installation, eliminating a high proportion
of common development errors such as 047 abends, catalog abends etc.
Other advantages of this arrangement are centralisation of control, and
reduction of maintenance.  Having one set of SMF datasets provides a
constant audit trial that can be incorporated into housekeeping jobs,
satisfying installation inspection demands.  If individual systems need
to be identified different SMFPRMxx members can be used.

A common PARMLIB provides centralised control and simplified
maintenance.  However, within each PARMLIB multiple IEASYSxx members can
be used to allow different system parameters for different systems if
required.  Alternatively, individual members like IEAAPFxx or SMFPRMxx
can be used at IPL time, eg R 00,SYSP=6C, or R 00,APF=6C,SMF=6C.


CATALOG

We use ICF catalogs, and all our test systems run from one Master
Catalog, ICFM.CAT500.  We can do this because datasets on a SYSRES may
be catalogued as being on volume '******' and unit '****'.  These
datasets are then picked up from the IPL volume.  Therefore, all SYSRES
sited datasets can be catalogued in this fashion.  As mentioned above,
DLIB datasets will contain a level identifier as part of their HLQ and
be uniquely catalogued.  The same applies to program product datasets.


GLOBAL ZONE

We have one Global Zone and PTS for all systems and products.  CAT500 is
the ideal place for the SMPE Global Zone and the PTS.  Placing them here
keeps them from using space on live volumes and decreases any risk of
accidental damage.  It means that the testing systems are self-contained
and can be regarded as a third 'entity' alongside production and
development systems.


JES

We choose to upgrade our JES (JES2) separately from MVS to simplify the
implementation of both, and keep the problems separate.  Thus when a new
MVS is being developed we will have a proven JES to use, and vice versa.
A copy of our current JES load library will reside on CAT500 and be
brought in via a STEPLIB DD statement in the JES2 procedure, giving each
system the same JES.  Spool can be shared amongst all systems, or two
spools can be defined (SYS1.HASPACE/ SYS2.HASPACE) and rotated as
needed.  To view and control data on spool, SDSF (program number
5798-DWX) can be used.  One SYSx.HASPINDX must be defined for each
HASPACE.


MIGRATION

When a test system has been verified to our satisfaction, we will begin
its migration to LVL2 (development) and, ultimately, to LVL1
(production).  When we try a new system as our development system, an
intermediate SYSRES - RES201 (LVL2 generation 1) is built.  This enables
us to move between current and new systems by only doing a CLPA, thus
avoiding cumbersome back-out procedures.

Once satisfied that the RES201 system can handle our development
workload the production workload is transferred to the RES201 system and
run for a period of operational proving.  If this proves satisfactory,
another SYSRES - RES101 is built, this being a copy of RES201.  Once
built the production workload reverts back to it.

During the period of implementation both production and development
systems can be returned to the down-level systems, independently, merely
by IPLing, thus providing immediate back-out in an emergency, which is
an over-riding consideration in our environment.

After the new systems have been accepted, RES201 and RES101 are copied
to RES200 and RES100 respectively and then freed to the disk pool.  At
this point the test system just implemented migrates from LVL6/7/8 to
become the oldest testing system LVL5, superseding all others.  It is
now in step with the live systems and can be used to apply service.


POINTS TO WATCH

In a shared PARMLIB, IEAAPFxx can grow to an enormous size.  Therefore,
after a test system is dropped we try to remove all unnecessary
references from PARMLIB, especially IEAAPFxx.

Similarly, the catalog has to be weeded periodically, if for no other
reason than to keep the hardcopy list to a reasonable size.

After a testing session we try to recover any LOGREC and dump dataset
information immediately.  This keeps these datasets from filling up and
ensures that the information is not over-written.



Stephen Kell
Systems Programmer
Bank of Scotland (UK)    â‚¬ Stephen Kell 1987


