Recent IBM announcements

ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE

IBM chose 15 February, Presidents' Day in the USA, to unveil details of
its latest software, which should help IBM large-systems installations
plan for future expansion and reassure them of the value of their
investments in IBM 3090 E series hardware.  At the heart of these
announcements is  a new machine architecture, Enterprise Systems
Architecture/370 (ESA/370), which is implemented in MVS/ESA, a
combination of MVS/SP Version 3 and MVS/DFP Version 3.

At present, ESA/370 is to be confined to IBM 3090 E series mainframes
and the newly-announced IBM 4381 91E and 92E models.  Contrary to much
of the speculation prior to these announcements, ESA/370 is still based
on 31-bit addressing: increased addressing is provided by new facilities
which allow users to access multiple (up to 8000) address and data
spaces, each of up to 2Gb.  Figure 1 shows how MVS has evolved in terms
of storage addressability.

HIPERSPACES

Data can also be processed using newly-introduced High Performance Space
(Hiperspace).  Hiperspace is used to transfer data in 4K multiples to
and from address spaces.  There are two varieties of Hiperspace.  One is
reserved exclusively for authorised programs and can only be used on
processors with expanded storage.  The other is for user applications to
use via the new data windowing facilities, which provide a high-level
language interface.  This second type of Hiperspace will use expanded
storage if it is available.

MVS/ESA users can expect performance improvements through enhanced
library services, which maintain copies of the most frequently used load
modules in data spaces for faster access and to reduce I/O.  In-storage
library directories are also kept.

DFSMS

The Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (DFSMS) is the name given
by IBM for the combined functionality of the DF family of products and
RACF.  This, together with the announcement of Version 3 of MVS/DFP,
reinforces the credibility of IBM's promise to provide its customers
with system managed storage.  Few of the actual details have so far been
revealed although the importance of the role of the storage or data
administrator has been strongly emphasised.  This position will need to
be created or, at the very least upgraded, at most installations.  The
Interactive Storage Management Facility (ISMF) has been considerably
extended to become the key component in DFSMS.  Dataset and storage
profile definitions will be controlled by the administrator through ISMF
reducing the involvement traditionally assumed by the user.

PR/SM

Further hardware differentiation has been made between the 3090 E series
and IBM's other mainframes with the introduction of the 3090 Processor
Resource/Systems Manager (PR/SM).  PR/SM (pronounced 'prism') enables a
3090 E processor to be partitioned  into a maximum of four logical
partitions or up to eight  logical partitions for a multi-processing
model operating in the physically partitioned configuration.  PR/SM
supersedes the Multiple High Performance Guests Support (MHPGS) feature.

HOW IT AFFECTS OTHER PARTIES

Assuming that IBM can successfully deliver these products, and do so on
time, who stands to be adversely affected by these announcements?

By bringing expanded storage into the foreground, IBM obviously intends
to emphasise the greater functionality of its newer mainframes and in so
doing effectively kill off sales of its older models, notably the 3080
series.  Similar strategies have worked in the past and should work this
time.

The plug compatible manufacturers, notably Amdahl and NAS, have some
catching up to do.  While it is very unlikely that the timing of these
announcements will have caught either by surprise, estimates on just how
much work is involved in implementing the new announcements vary from
analyst to analyst.  The PR/SM announcement must clearly be seen as
IBM's answer to Amdahl's Multiple Domain Facility (MDF), which offers
similar capabilities.  On the surface, PR/SM could be potentially very
damaging to Amdahl, since some Amdahl mainframe sales can be attributed
to MDF's success.

There does not appear to be too much in the MVS/DFP Version 3
announcements that should unduly worry the likes of Sterling Software,
Computer Associates, or Innovative Data Products, suppliers of
alternative storage management products, apart from providing further
evidence that IBM is pursuing a market hitherto left largely for
third-party software vendors to exploit.

          â‚¬ Xephon 1988



