Listing allocated datasets

Readers of Paul Horak's useful article, Listing attributes of allocated
datasets, in the July 1988 issue of MVS Update may be interested in the
additions needed to ensure reliable operation of the LISTDD program in
an MVS/XA 2.2 or MVS/ESA environment.

In line 58 of the program (two lines after the label LOOP1) there is an
instruction to load the address of the JFCB from field TIOEJFCB in the
TIOT.  This instruction will function correctly as long as the JFCB
remains below the 16-megabyte line (ie MVS/XA releases 2.1.0 through to
2.1.7, and all releases of MVS/370).  However, in MVS/XA 2.2 and
subsequent releases (including MVS/ESA), it becomes an installation
option to move the JFCB above the 16-megabyte line.  The location of the
JFCB, along with 12 other scheduler control blocks, is determined by an
option on the JOBCLASS, TSUCLASS, and STCCLASS statements in JES2PARM,
or on the CIPARM statement in the JES3 initialisation deck.  These
options can be overridden for individual jobs by the IEFUJV SMF exit.
For those installations that have chosen to place the scheduler control
blocks above the 16-megabyte line, a somewhat more circuitous method of
determining the JFCB address is required.

Those who are familiar with the TIOT from system dumps may have noticed
that the JFCB pointers in the TIOT are 24-bit address fields aligned in
the high-order three bytes of a fullword rather than the more usual
low-order three bytes.  The reason for this is that OS/360 environments
(including MVT, the predecessor of MVS) stored their JFCBs on disk
storage.  Thus the TIOEJFCB field was originally a disk address (the TTR
of the JFCB in the SYS1.SYSJOBQE dataset).  In fact the debugging
handbook still refers to this field, incorrectly, as a TTR.  When the
JFCB moved into virtual storage with the first release of MVS, TIOEJFCB
became a 24-bit virtual storage address, but retained its unusual
alignment within the TIOT.  This remains true for all releases of MVS up
to and including MVS/XA 2.1.7.  Once the JFCB has moved above the line,
however, it has a 31-bit address, for which there is no room in the
TIOT.  This poses a problem, because the format of the TIOT is too
well-established to be changed.  The solution chosen by the designers of
MVS was to replace the JFCB address by a 24-bit identifier called a
token, which uniquely identifies a particular JFCB.  If the JFCB is
below the 16-megabyte line, the token is a 24-bit virtual address of the
JFCB.  But if the JFCB is above the line, a call must be made to a new
MVS component, the SWA Manager, to translate the 24-bit token into a
31-bit virtual storage address.

The JFCB is used to invoke the SWA Manager.  The program calling the
SWAREQ macro must provide a parameter list called the SWA External
Parameter Area (EPA), whose format is defined by the IEFZB505 mapping
macro.  The program must also include mapping macros for the CVT and the
JESCT, because the SWAREQ macro references these control blocks to
obtain the address of the SWA Manager routine.  The SWAREQ macro is
documented in GC28-1151 MVS/XA System Macros and Facilities Volume 1.
Documentation APAR OY04926 provides clarification of the SWAREQ calling
sequence.

Because the LISTDD program runs unauthorised, it must use the UNAUTH=YES
form of the SWAREQ macro.  Unauthorised SWA Manager support has only
recently become available through APAR OY10290.  To use the UNAUTH=YES
keyword, PTF UY16002 (on PUT 8802) must be installed on the MVS/XA 2.2
system.

Although the SWAREQ macro exists in MVS/XA 2.1.2, 2.1.3, and 2.1.7,
there is currently no PTF to provide unauthorised SWA Manager support
for these releases.  Consequently the modifications to the LISTDD
program will not be portable to pre-MVS/XA 2.2 environments.

The changes required to the LISTDD program are shown below.  After the
ICM R1,7,TIOEJFCB statement, the following lines need to be added:

         LA    R10,REQEPA      POINT TO SWA PARAMETER AREA
         USING ZB505,R10       ADDRESSABILITY TO EPA
         STCM  R1,7,SWVA       STORE JFCB TOKEN INTO EPA
         SR    R1,R1           CLEAR R1
         ST    R1,SWQMPA       ZEROISE QMPA ADDRESS
         SWAREQ MF=(E,REQLIST),UNAUTH=YES  CALL SWA MANAGER
         L     R1,SWPFXPTR     LOAD 31-BIT JFCB ADDRESS

The following data areas need to be added after the LTORG statement:

REQLIST  SWAREQ FCODE=LA,EPA=REQPTR,MF=L    SWAREQ PLIST
REQPTR   DC    A(REQEPA)       POINTER TO SWA EPA
REQEPA   DC    XL36'00'        SWA EXTERNAL PARAMETER AREA

and the following mapping macros need to be added at the end of the
program (before the END statement):

         IEFZB505 LOCEPAX=YES  EPA MAPPING DSECT
         CVT   DSECT=YES       CVT MAPPING DSECT
         IEFJESCT ,            JESCT MAPPING DSECT

Also, the following statements need to be added after the LISTDD CSECT
statement:

LISTDD   AMODE 31
LISTDD   RMODE 24


Roger Bowler (UK)   â‚¬ Xephon 1989



