 SIT overrides - a warning
The term ToverrideU used by IBM is a bit of a misnomer; parameters assembled
into the SIT are merged, not replaced, by the overrides.  Some examples follow,
which show where confusion may occur as a result of misunderstanding the
process.  I believe this process is independent of CICS release and operating
system.
The worst example of this, and the most insidious, is the use of the COLD
keyword for many CICS tables.  If this is assembled into the SIT it cannot be
overridden, although you may think otherwise.  If FCT=(AA,COLD) is assembled
into the SIT and FCT=BB is an override, what you get is DFHFCTBB loaded and the
datasets TcoldU started.  If you had assembled FCT=BB in the SIT the datasets
would have been TwarmU or TemergencyU started  - confusing isnUt it?  The same
applies to the DL/I parameter.
I havenUt checked all the SIT parameters with multiple keywords, but the above
examples demonstrate the need for caution.  The solution is obvious: either
assemble what you want in the SIT, or omit the parameter completely from the
assembled SIT and code all the keywords valid for that parameter in the
override.
As an aside, but on a related topic: CICS 1.7 restructured the TCT, and as a
result has removed the facility to TcoldU start it.  To confuse the unwary,
coding TCT=(AA,COLD) anywhere will always result in the TCT being TwarmU started
(COLD is ignored, but not rejected).  If a terminal suffers the misfortune of
being put Tout of serviceU or goes NOCREATE (NOINTLOG) when CICS is shut down
thatUs the status it will have when CICS is restarted, unless CICS is started
with START=COLD.  I have been advised that changing the TCT suffix will force a
TcoldU start, but I have not formally tested this.

Melvyn Maltz
CICS Systems Programmer (UK)  ) Xephon 1988





































