 CICS message routing - further thoughts
The article CICS message routing - a practical solution in issue 17 of CICS
Update addressed the problem of how to display a message to the operators while
preserving their terminal environment.  We have found the suggested solution
very useful but have encountered the following shortcoming: most of the enquiry
programs used in our installation make use of BMS terminal operator paging;
therefore the terminals are set up for Automatic Task Initiation (ATI) so that
the paging transaction, CSPG, can start immediately the application program
returns control to CICS following an EXEC CICS SEND PAGE.
This causes problems for the suggested message display program, which is
designed to start immediately on a terminal when no task is running (through
EXEC CICS START).  The problem we have found with message display occurs when
the application returns control to CICS prior to the CSPG paging program
starting.  At this point, with the program as suggested, the message flashes
briefly across the screen too quickly to see and is lost and then paging starts.
Our amendment prevents the start of paging by setting the terminal to NOATI
status (ie does not permit Automatic Task Initiation).  The message is then
displayed and after a 5-second delay the terminal is set back to ATI whereupon
paging can continue normally.  If there is no paging task waiting, the amendment
is transparent.  Our additions to the code are simply two links to the CICS
programmable interface to master terminal functions (ie DFHEMTA) with the
command CEMT SET TERMINAL(xxxx) NOATI/ATI.  Alternatively, if CICS 1.7 is
installed, the code could include EXEC CICS SET TERMINAL (xxxx) NOATI/ATI
commands.  The same code is then required in an abend-handling routine to
restore the terminalUs ATI status.

Steve Sage
Systems Programmer
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (UK)  ) MAFF 1989





































