
Bugs and Remedies
bugs at work

Don't expect me to correct errors in the system.  I might try.
But please send me your observations.

My second try was to produce a nice post-mortem dump using a
program like BEGIN INTEGER i; i:= i/i; END This provoked a error
that hit me during th 1970s an 1980s from time to time.  Finally
I got it: Thou shallst not try to access to a byte in a page that
doesn't belong to you.  The explanation: Assume register one
pointing to the last word in a page UNPK 0(9,R2),0,5(R2) followed
by a TRT of the first 8 octets and setting the 9th to blank.
Works almost, but not for the last word in page where you cannot
access the next.  This editing technique is used in various parts
of the run time system but without real consequences.

z/OS will experience

IEW2551E 4606 THE ENTRY NAME ZYQENT ON THE CURRENT OBJECT MODULE
   END RECORD IS NOT A DEFINED NAME IN THIS MODULE.

One remedy is to edit the object deck, change ZYQENT to blanks on
the END card, and ensure to have EP=ZYQENT as part of the loader
parameters.  What to do for the linkage editor is left as an
exercise.  Thanks to Roger Bowler to provide this patch for the
compiler to blank out the entry point in the generated object
deck.

The runtime system also has a small year 2000 problem which
doesn't prohibit execution.  Look at when the sample program
starts its execution, so one may assume that there were at least
two programmers at work.



Member SEPL -  External Procedure Library Manual



The language standards      (member names SLP--)

There are several version of the Simula language.  The 1986
version of the language standard is not fully supported by this
Simula Compiler.  Hidden and Protected is not really implemented
for example, but that doesn't really hurt.
Link -   http://prosjekt.ring.hibu.no/simula/Standard/

Some other material is waiting to be liberated into wilderness
after getting scanned, registered, passported and tortured.
Simula I (fifth edition 1967)

SIMULA I manual cover

  SLP00   Title, Table of Content and Preface
  SLP01   1. SIMULATION AND DISCRETE EVENT SYSTEMS
  SLP02   2. PROCESSES
  SLP03   3. ELEMENTS AND SETS
  SLP04   4. SEQUENCING
  SLP05   5. CONNECTION
  SLP06   6. THE MAIN PROGRAM
  SLP07   7. RANDOM DRAWING
  SLP08   8. DATA ANALYSIS
  SLP09   9. THE SIMULA SYNTAX
  SLP10   10. THE UNIVAC 1107 SIMULA
  SLP11   11. ALGOL FUNDAMENTALS
  SLP12   12. A SIMPLE SIMULA DESCRIPTION
  SLP13   13. A WORKED EXAMPLE and ANNEX

The SIMULA 67 COMMON BASE LANGUAGE    (members SCB--)

This is scanned copy containing some hand-made annotations
corresponding to corrections that have been made later.  Each
chapter really starts on on odd page number.  No pages are
missing.

  SCB00   Title, Preface and Index
  SCB01   1. Introduction
  SCB02   2. Class Declarations
  SCB03   3. Types and Variables
  SCB04   4. Expressions
  SCB05   5. Relations
  SCB06   6. Statements
  SCB07   7. Remote accessing
  SCB08   8. Procedures and parameter transmission
  SCB09   9. Sequencing
  SCB10   10. The type "text"
  SCB11   11. Input-Output
  SCB12   12. Random Drawing
  SCB13   13. Utility Procedures
  SCB14   14. System Classes
  SCB15   15. Separate compilation
  SCB16   16. Common Base restrictions
  SCB17   17. Recommended Extensions
  SCB18   18. Features being investigated
  SCB19   19. References
  SCB20   20. Alphabetic Index of syntactical units

For implementers
The Simula Implementation Guide     (members SIG--)

  SIG00   Title and Introduction
  SIG01   1. Introduction Compiler
  SIG02   2. Introduction Runtime system
  SIG03   3. Types
  SIG04   4. Sub-Blocks
  SIG05   5. Procedure Declaration
  SIG06   6. Class Declaration
  SIG07   7. Expressions
  SIG08   8. Actual parameters
  SIG09   9. Assignement
  SIG10   10. Denotes
  SIG11   11. Relations
  SIG12   12. For-Statements
  SIG13   13. Remote Identifiers
  SIG14   14. Connections
  SIG15   15. Block Prefixing
  SIG16   16. Sequenceing Statements
  SIG17   17. Labels and Switches
  SIG18   18. Random Drawing and Data Analysis
  SIG19   19. System Classes
  SIG20   20. Separate Compilation
  SIG21   21. Store Collapse
  SIG22   22. Formal Description of Simula Common Base Runtime System


