This file illustrates some of the work done at AGCO UK
Coventry to use TSSO from file 404 for the CBT tape to
control an MVS system running under Flex-ES.
The members start with;

TIMER - this is the main clist which drives the other
members. This is invoked by AOF processing by some message
which appears at fixed intervals.  I have two main threads
driven by this clist;

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
=======================
We were moving production off an IBM Multiprise 2003 which
had an excess of MIPS and which had a good disk subsystem of
an EMC Symmetrix on four ESCON channels.  Our IMS response
times were variable and our overnight BMP jobs had very
elongated run times.  These applications are very cache
unfriendly, but the EMC box had so much cache it didn't
matter.  We started to monitor the Flex-ES cachestatistics
for our disk controllers.  Our best bet would be to scrap
the individual track caches and assign cache at the Control
Unit level.  This is then shared out by Flex-ES as demand
requires.  I continue to collect Flex-ES cache statistics,
although I now rarely bother to look at them.  The TSSO
members used for this activity are;

CONFIG - Our Flex-ES configuration file which can be tied to
the other stuff.  It illustrates our cache definitions.

CACHE - Every hour this TSSO clist runs commands on the
Flex-ES system to collect Flex-ES cachestatistics for every
disk controller defined in the config file and appends them
to a Unixware file.

FLEXJ01 - is a batch job that TIMER submits just before
midnight each day.  It takes a snapshot of Unixware memory
usage over the last 24 hours which is appended to the
cachestatistics file.  This file is then FTP'd over to a
mainframe GDG so I have a history that I can browse from
ISPF.

REPORT - is a sample output from FLEXJ01.

RESET - a clist which is called at the end of FLEJ01 to
write an end-of-file at the start of the cachestastics file
ready to collect another day's worth of data.

STORAGE MANAGEMENT
==================
Another function of TIMER is to automate various HSM
housekeeping commands such as DELVOL.
The Storage Management members are;

STORAGE - This clist monitors the non-SMS disks and switches
them from STORAGE to PRIVATE if they get too full and
vice-versa as they empty.

SYSDA - this REXX uses the VTOC command off the CBT tape to
monitor allocations on a few disks that I called SYSDA.

