Introduction

This MVSHSM pachage is an extension of the Hierarchical Storage
Manager (HSM), to manage the secondary migration level data (ML2)
on the network.

Here, in the ISIS Papyrus Software, we have 2 very old tape
drives, no operators, we are 5 kilometers from the machine
location, and we have 500 Gigabyte online storage, but
practically "unlimited" storage on the network. We extended the
HSM, via standard exits, to store the ML2 data on the network. We
have been using this modification since 2005; maybe some other
small installations can take advantage of this.

We define an ML2 disk volume, and via the HSM migration exits, we
move everything from this volume to a Network File System (NFS)
directory. Before a recall, the proper HSM exit moves the
requested dataset back to our ML2 disk volume, and the HSM can
finish the restore.

The exit routines are called by the HSM before the proper HSM
action. It is good for the "recall", but for the "migrate" we
can just move everything from the ML2 disk drive to the NFS
directory, and the last migrated dataset will reside on the ML2
disk volume.

We are using:
 * MM Second Level Migration Dataset exit
 * MD Dataset Migration exit
 * RD Recall exit.

The exit routines were written in C++, we provide the complete
source code and a load library. As sample, we modified the HSM
installation STARTUP, and we provide also our current, running
HSM configuration by ISIS, as it is.

Warning

This is a limited HSM setup, with some simple functionality; it
is working here in this way for several years, but has never been
tested with a complex HSM configuration. We can handle securely
only one ML2 recall or one ML2 migration request. It works only
with non SMS volumes.


